# MIPS Emulator
This is a cross-platform emulator for the MIPS architecture, capable of running executables generated by my assembler (https://github.com/pclava/mips_assembler).
The emulator only supports a subset of the instructions supported by the assembler (e.g., excluding floating-point instructions). 

The emulator supports memory-mapped graphics and IO using SDL3. Use the `-d` flag before the executable name to use these features.
 
The goals of this project were to learn C++ and to learn how emulators work.

## Installation
To install, download one of the available binaries under **Releases**, or build the project yourself:

`$ cmake -B build -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release -DBUILD_TESTING=OFF`

`$ cmake --build build`

`$ cmake --install build --prefix dist`

The executable will be in `dist/bin`

## Usage
The emulator expects an executable and, optionally, arguments for the `main` function, if the program has one:

`$ ./MIPSEmulator <options> <executable> <arg1, ...>`

One flag is supported: `-d` to enable the SDL frontend for memory-mapped IO.

The executable must be generated by the linker and follow the MOF file format, specified in `mof.h`. This is a minimal executable and linkable file format written for this emulator.

### Graphics and IO
The emulator uses memory-mapped I/O from addresses `0xffff0000` to `0xffffffff`. The first 64000 bytes are reserved for the display, which is based on VGA Mode 13h and uses a 256-color palette. The executable at `examples/palette.out` renders this palette. Addresses `0xfffffa00` to `0xfffffaff` are used as registers by the simulated hardware. The remaining addresses in the MMIO space are left to the code.

The emulator issues three I/O-related interrupts. These pass control to the exception handler, which must be provided. A rudimentary handler is provided in `__start.asm`. On every refresh (62.5 times per second), the emulator issues a display refresh interrupt (IP2 bit in the Cause register). The emulator also issues an interrupt on a keypress or key release (bits IP3 and IP4, respectively). For these, the SDL scancode is written as a byte to address `0xfffffa00`. The program at `examples/src/keyboard.s` uses these to implement an input buffer and exposes some functions to use it.

Note that the emulator currently does not run at a fixed speed. The current CPU speed is displayed in the title of the SDL window. A more powerful machine will run the code faster than a less powerful machine. To ensure consistent timing, your code should rely on the display refresh interrupt, which always occurs 62.5 times per second.

### Examples
Three example executables are provided in `examples/`. These are a snake game, a drawing of a bird, and a rendering of the color palette. Run these with `./MIPSEmulator -d <executable>`.

## Notes
The emulator is little-endian.

The list of supported instructions and their opcodes can be found in `InstructionSet.cpp`.

---
Every line of code in this repository was written by a human.
